[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello,
my juicy co-creators, Lilou
here.
I am on the road in England,
in London because there's
so many great teachers and such
a great energy in this big city
that I have to come back
quite on a regular basis
and do those videos for Gaiam
TV, a wonderful TV, you know,
online, and I'm excited
to interview you, Charlie.
I heard of your work.
You're a Hay House author.
You wrote "Dreams of
Awakening" and I'm excited
to speak of lucid dreaming.
Oh my God, for all
the lucid dreamers,
the out-of-body experiencers,
you know,
the conscious sleeping,
my goodness.
So, what, how, you know,
I'm very interested to hear
about your own journey to
this and how it's evolving
and your new approach to
it, etc. But I would love
to first hear what is actually
lucid dreaming so we're all
on the same page, the
obvious question.
>> Charlie Morley: So a
lucid dream is a dream
where you know that
you're dreaming.
So it's not just a
really vivid dream.
It's not a dream that
you remember very well.
It's specifically
being in a dream
and you're, aha, I'm dreaming.
Now once you have that moment
you will often remember the
dream very well and the dream
will often be very vivid
but that's not what
makes it lucid.
The definition of a lucid
dream is a dream where you go,
ah I know I'm dreaming as
the dream is happening.
>> Lilou: So you
can ignite it too?
I mean you can want
to dream and you dream
and that's also called
a lucid dreaming.
You can do that basically
anytime, day or night?
>> Morley: Yeah, yeah,
that's what I do.
Yes, so teach people
how to have that at work
because most people might
have had that occasionally,
a spontaneous, lucid dream
and I'm sure most people
watching must say, oh yeah,
I know that experience.
Maybe it's happened
once or twice.
So what I teach is the
techniques to allow people to do
it at will, so a certain
meditation technique,
self-hypnosis techniques
and a lot obviously
from Tibetan Buddhism.
>> Lilou: Yeah, how is that
approach different to other ones
because there's a lot of
people that teach that,
obviously you're
a young teacher.
How old are you?
>> Morley: Ah, 30.
>> Lilou: 30, my
goodness, you look like 20.
Anyway that's awesome.
Tell me how is your
approach new?
>> Morley: Well, I combine the
practices of Tibetan Buddhism
but in a way that's totally
accessible for non-Buddhists.
So, there's seen to be two
major camps in lucid dreaming,
the Western psychological field
which teaches the technique
to become lucid and
then kind of say, oh,
when you're lucid then
you can fly about.
You can meet movie stars.
Maybe you can do a bit of
shadow integration stuff
but it's quite, kind
of base level stuff.
And then you've got the
Tibetan Buddhist stuff
which can sometimes
seem quite inaccessible.
It's about going to the lucid
dream state, transforming
yourself into this deity and
this archetype of compassion --
That can seem quite far
out for a lot of people.
So I wanted to deal with
something in the middle.
Some people who want to go
beyond the often-limited scope
of the Western psychological
view of lucid dreaming
but aren't quite ready
perhaps or aren't interested
in committing to the full-on
Tibetan dream yoga practices
but somewhere in the middle,
to make lucid dreaming
a spiritual path,
whether you're a
Buddhist, non-Buddhist
or anything in between.
>> Lilou: Yeah, it's even, what
do you mean by spiritual path?
Because it seems like
there's also some growth,
some real personal, you know,
growth and spiritual expansion
and all of that within because
you can change your life
through lucid dreaming.
Is that what you're saying?
>> Morley: Yeah, absolutely,
I mean once you're lucid you're
conscious in the unconscious
which is a state most
people will only enter
into in deep-level meditation
and of course in hypnosis.
So it's a nice metaphor to use
that the hypnotic trance state
where the hypnotherapist
will guide an element
of your conscious mind
into the subconscious
and plant a suggestion
of healing intent.
Now in a lucid dream you're
doing the same thing but you're
in the depths of
the unconscious.
I mean you can't get more
unconscious than a sleep.
So if you plant a
suggestion of healing intent
in a lucid dream it can work
with often far greater efficacy
than if a hypnotherapist
implanted the suggestion.
Now in no way am I saying
that makes lucid dreaming
better than hypnotherapy.
You know, I've had many years
training in self-hypnosis
with a wonderful teacher
and actually hypnosis
is more accessible.
You know, right now we could go
into hypnotic trance within 20
or 30 minutes, to have
a lucid dream you've got
to be tired enough
to go to sleep.
Then you've got to go
through the deep-sleep stages.
Then you've got to
enter the dream.
You've got to know
the practices.
You've got to do this, that,
so it's not as accessible
as hypnosis but once
you're in there,
because you're planting
the seed of the suggestion
so deep it works
very, very powerfully.
You know, I've had
somebody just,
coming up to his fifth
month now, of no cigarettes
after six years smoking.
He had one lucid dream and in
that lucid dream he
planted the suggestion.
He no longer was
addicted to cigarettes
and that the addiction
no longer served him
and he lived a healthy,
beneficial lifestyle,
free of cigarettes.
He hasn't smoked since that day.
You know, I bring that
guy out to workshops
to kind of tell his story.
People don't believe me.
You know, it's so, so powerful.
If you can have that lucid dream
you can make lasting changes
and direct interventions
within your own psychology.
>> Lilou: Yes, did you go
into the work with scientists
or had some kind
of understanding
of really how all this works
on a more like tangible basis?
>> Morley: Yeah, I mean, that's
what the book is full of.
The book looks at everything
from three major perspectives,
Western neuroscience,
psychology and Tibetan Buddhism.
So we even looked at the lucid
dream state from the point
of view of neuroscience and
those two other perspectives.
And there's a lot
of science on it.
I mean this is why lucid
dreaming is becoming more
popular nowadays
because we have now the
science to back it up.
I mean it's first
scientifically proved
by Keith Hearne in
the early 70s.
But, just about two or three
years ago the Max-Planck
Institute and Heidelberg
University in Germany,
they started doing functional
magnetic resonance imaging scans
on lucid dreamers so you could
actually see the moment they
became lucid.
So now we know we're
beyond anecdote.
It absolutely exists.
We know that it's the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
that activates within the
dream state thus triggering
self-reflective awareness.
So there's no ifs, no buts.
It's now. It's real.
It's science.
>> Lilou: How does it look then
compared to the meditative state
if you look at the
brain at that stage?
>> Morley: Very similar,
if you look at somebody
in a lucid dream state they're
in a state of meditation.
In fact some of the highest
frequency brainwaves ever
recorded were in the brain of a
lucid dreaming subject so very,
very high frequency
and every moment spent
in the lucid dream is a moment
of mindful meditation.
You know if for one
minute you forget you're
in a lucid dream you're
going to slip out, you know,
you're going to wake up.
So there is this constant
awareness of the fact you're
in a dream as you're dreaming.
>> Lilou: How is it
different than the Dream Yoga
that you heard of
because I know you started
and you could maybe
tell us a little bit
about your story earlier
on at 12, 16 you had kind
of those moments where you
started just naturally,
just lucid dreaming but
it was more for fun, huh?
And at some point you
encountered Buddhism?
>> Morley: Yes, so let's look at
both aspects of that question.
The first one is
about Dream Yoga.
So Dream Yoga is the name
given to a collection
of practices found
within Tibetan Buddhism
that have lucid dream
training at their core.
But Dream Yoga contains
both out-of-body experiences
as we call it in the
West, conscious sleeping
and lucid dream practice.
Dream Yoga is traditionally
found within certain aspects,
certain lineages of
Tibetan Buddhism.
When I first got into lucid
dream training at the age
of kind of 16, after being aware
of it at 12, but then going back
to being a 12-year-old and
when about 16 when I got
into it I wasn't
into any of that.
I was into about having
sex in the lucid dream
because a lucid dream is
like super, super realistic.
You know, you're in there
and it feels as real as this.
You can feel your heart beating.
You feel the hair on your arms.
It's so, so real.
So when you have that as
a 16-year-old you want
to like do what you're into at
16 which for me was just sex.
So I'd just go into the lucid
dream state and call
out for like all
these girls to appear
and just spend my whole
lucid dreams having sex.
And luckily a few years
later I got into Buddhism
and somebody mentioned
this term, Dream Yoga,
and I was like, what's
Dream Yoga?
And they explained it.
And I said, oh, well I can do
lucid dream and the monk said,
you know, what do you
do in your lucid dreams?
And I was like, oh, you know.
I didn't want to tell him.
And I said, well you know,
what do you do as a monk?
What are you supposed to do?
And we said, oh we use it
for spiritual practice.
We use it for exploring the
very essence of reality.
We use it for training and
exploration of emptiness.
And I was thinking, wow.
You know, I had no idea.
I thought this stuff
was just for kind of sex
and skateboarding which is what
I was using it for up till then.
And suddenly this door
opened and I realized it's
like I was holding a baby
and going, what does it do?
What does it do?
You know, a baby doesn't really
do anything but you nurture
that baby and you might
have the next Gandhi
or next Nelson Mandela
on your hands,
so too with lucid dreaming.
It's a potential
which we can waste
on just meeting movie stars
and having sex with elements
of our self but we can
also go one step further
into deep self-development
and spiritual realization
in fact while we sleep.
>> Lilou: Yeah, were you able
to also lucid dream once you
start meditating because I guess
when you start looking at
Tibetan and getting closer
to the, to this Lama, then maybe
you have started
changing your practice?
>> Morley: Yeah, I mean one
of the original lucid
dream induction techniques
is meditation.
You do enough meditation,
you're going to start to have,
kind of clearer dreams and
often spontaneous lucid dreams,
people who do long, extended
periods of meditation.
So that definitely fills up
the lucidity tank, as it were.
And also when I got
into it because I was
into lucid dreaming I was
looking at certain meditations
that were linked to the
Dream Yoga practices.
Some of them are
kind of inaccessible
and you're not really supposed
to do until you're on retreat
and stuff but at a young
age I was finding a way
to find these techs and trying
them out and stuff like that.
So yeah, meditation is
most definitely linked
to the practice.
>> Lilou: Yeah, it must have
helped because on going back
to the brain now,
there's neuroplasticity
that happening, you becoming.
It's becoming easier and
easier I guess as people train.
They can get quicker into
that stage because it's quite.
It's quite something I mean
from the outside to think of it
for people that have never
done it, like me, you know.
We're like, wow, how
cool is this stuff?
>> Morley: Yeah, and it is cool
and the neuroplasticity thing
is one of the coolest aspects.
You know, in a non-lucid dream,
let's say you're dreaming
about cycling or something you
might wake up in the morning
and say, oh, I dreamt about
cycling, maybe I'll want
to go cycling a little bit more
but nothing's really
happened in the brain.
If you have a lucid dream
about going cycling the lucid
dream state is so realistic
that the brain thinks
you're cycling
so it starts sending
electrical impulses
and increased blood flow to the
muscles engaged with cycling.
So they've shown that
if you lucid dream
about riding a bike the next
day you're better at it.
So you can practice
in the lucid dream
and learn to become better.
If you do press-ups in the lucid
dream you can increase muscle
mass in the waking state.
I mean this is nuts.
You're leaving lasting
neuro-pathways
in the very fabric of the brain
based on what you choose to do
in the lucid dream state.
The Heidelberg University, I
mean they have a lot of studies
like 350 professional athletes
have been trained to lucid dream
because they see the
potential and this is so high
because if you can get
better at your sport
in your sleep you've got
like a third, you've got kind
of eight hours extra a night
where you can be training while
the competition is snoozing.
>> Lilou: How is it better or
more efficient I should say
than the visualization?
>> Morley: Well, interestingly
the controlled study
that we're using in this was
visualized training.
So right now I can visualize
I'm on a bike, right?
I'm really, really
visualizing I'm on a bike.
I feel the handlebars but I
know I'm not riding a bike
and I'm sitting with you whereas
in the lucid dream state it's
so realistic the brain thinks
you're actually cycling.
You know, lucid dreaming
about doing something isn't
just like visualizing it.
It isn't like imagining it.
It's like you're
actually doing it
because it's 100
percent visualization,
so complete in fact that the
brain mistakes it for reality.
So it thinks you're doing this
so if you engage
a physical action
in a lucid dream state the
motor cortex sends a
command saying, you
know, move your legs.
Luckily you're paralyzed
during dream and sleep
so your legs don't move.
The electrical impulses
still make it through
and leave that muscle memory.
Now we're talking
about, you know, cycling
and press-ups and stuff.
What the hell's the
point of that?
But imagine if we can practise
other things, our capacity
for compassion, kindness, being
the person we know we could be
but have, are too scared to be.
Working on our meditation
training in our sleep,
working on our spiritual
practice in our sleep,
you know there are far
better things to be doing
than just press-ups but
the physical manifestation
of it is the easiest kind
of example to get people to.
>> Lilou: You say that we
can work on our shadow?
>> Morley: Yeah,
so the shadow is.
>> Lilou: How do you define
it and how can we do that?
>> Morley: Yeah, so the
shadow is a Jungian term,
well Jung kind of pioneered the
term, used to describe the parts
of the unconscious that we've
denied, disowned or rejected.
So the shadow is the dark
side of the human psyche.
But dark doesn't
necessarily mean bad.
You know, for a lot of people,
the shadow contains a
repressed sexuality,
their oppressed anger, their
oppressed capacity for wrath
and aggression and yet it
will also contain the elements
that you feel you're not worthy
to accept within yourself.
So let's say I'm a
little boy and I'm dancing
around the bedroom, seven
years old and my dad walks in
and says, oh, stop dancing.
You know, dancing is for girls.
I will then repress
my inner dancer
into the shadows of my mind.
So that will, so the shadow
will contain my inner dancer
archetype as well.
So it's not just kind of
bad things in the shadow.
But for a lot of people
it is the dark side
of the human psyche.
>> Lilou: When you come,
become a hip-hop dancer?
>> Morley: You can't
become a hip-hop dancer.
You need to bring this out.
So in the lucid dream state
you can intentionally integrate
shadow aspects.
Now of course the shadow
is being integrated,
non-lucid dreaming as well
as through Jungian
analytical psychology, therapy,
other forms of dream work.
But in the lucid dream state
you can do it very directly.
Because you can actually meet a
personified form of your shadow
which is rare and
almost exclusive
to the lucid dream state, to
be able to actually converse
with your shadow not as
a concept but actually
as a seemingly physicalized
being.
>> Lilou: Tell us about
your experience with a demon.
Facing a demon, my God.
>> Morley: Yeah, so when I
first started lucid dreaming,
teaching lucid dreaming I
had a lot, kind of repression
around the things that I
should or shouldn't be doing
in the lucid dream state.
I kind of had this idea that
my Buddhist teacher was going
to look at my dream diary and if
I was having any lucid dreams
about kind of sex or violence
that I'd get like chucked out
and I wouldn't be
allowed to teach anymore.
So I started to become really
repressive with my dreaming
and if I was having
a lucid dream,
like a sexy girl turned up, so
I was going no, push it away,
don't want any of that or
there was some violence.
Oh, I don't want any of that.
I just want to sit and
meditate in a lucid dream.
And when I was doing this I saw
that these shadow aspects
became more and more powerful
and I started getting these
kinds of shadow attacks,
basically like nightmares.
You're in
a lucid dream and these big
kind of demonic figures appear
and I started fighting them.
I thought that's the
best thing to do.
I should fight these things.
And I asked my teacher
and he was like, no,
this could be a shadow element.
You shouldn't fight it,
you should embrace it.
So these demons came up and
the kind of famous one, well,
the one I talk about a lot
is when the demon appeared
in this kind of three-headed
figure and I hugged it rather
than running away from it.
And when I hugged it,
it turned into me.
And I was like hugging myself
and this version of myself kind
of looked at me and just
went, and then I woke up.
And I never had any
more of those nightmares
or shadow attacks again.
Now I don't know whether
that was, you know,
my directly hugging my shadow
but I talked to my teacher
and he seemed to think it was.
But then he said, you
know, you're crazy,
I didn't mean literally
hug the thing.
And I said, what do you mean?
You said, embrace the shadow.
And he said, yeah, embrace
the shadow means like,
that you know, talk to it,
engage it, the seeing of the,
don't literally hug it.
But since then he said, no,
do hug it because the
lucid dream state is unique
in that it allows you
to interact physically
with projections
of your own psyche.
You know, in the lucid dream
you can meet your inner child
which will often
appear as someone
who looked a bit
like you as a kid.
You know, you can
meet your higher self.
You can meet the whore, the
mother, the lovers, the fool,
all of the deck of the tarot,
all of the tarot deck in you.
You know, these archetypes
reside within your psyche
and in the lucid dream state
you can meet them tangibly
which is amazing.
You know this stuff
never gets old.
It's so fascinating and
it's so psychedelic.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> Morley: I mean
anyone who's into kind
of psychedelic experience,
you want a real psychedelic
experience,
walk around your own psyche.
In a lucid dream, you
know, you're aware
that everything is you.
You go, wow, this chair is me.
This Lilou is a feminine
projection
of my own psyche, wow.
Suddenly any boundaries
between us would break
down because I realize,
oh you're not separate
from me, you are me.
Now imagine if we could do
that in the waking state.
Imagine if we could
walk down the street
and just take a moment to think,
these people weren't separate
from us, they're
projections of our own dream,
sharing the dream with us.
Think what we could do.
It would be so much harder
to be unkind to someone
if you knew they
were part of you
and lucid dreaming allows you
to open up to that potential.
So in the waking state it
makes it easier to realize.
>> Lilou: Can we
say life is a dream?
>> Morley: Yeah,
we could say it.
I think it's probably an
overly simplistic thing to say
but I think life is far
more like a shared dream
than an inherently
existing reality
that we believe it to be.
You know, I don't think it's as
simple as, oh, it's all a dream
but it's definitely
dreamlike, definitely dreamlike.
And I think in the same ways,
if we can become lucid
in our dreams, we can
so co-create and start
to manifest the dream at will
within the confines of course
of the power of the unconscious.
So, too, in this waking state
can we start to manifest,
can we start to wake up to life,
can we start to create the
dream that we want to be dreamt.
>> Lilou: We're going to
go into the practical side
and how we do that, but I hear,
what is your relationship
to alarm clock?
>> Morley: Pretty
good, definitely not.
>> Lilou: Any others --
>> Morley: Like, oh
God, get away from me
but I do have a pretty
cool alarm clock you know.
I often say, who came up with
this concept of alarm clock?
Who thought, okay, the best
way we can start the day is
in a state of alarm, you
know, adrenalin cortisol alarm,
the worst way to start our
day and yet most of us,
so ditch the alarm clock.
Get a soothing clock, you know,
that likes classical music,
whatever you like, something
that kind of wakes you up slowly
or one of those sunshine
alarm clocks.
You know, it kind of
re-creates the dawn rising
and stuff like that.
>> Lilou: You don't
want to brutally wake
up from this lucid dreaming.
I mean do you have a sense
of the time that there is
in reality, I mean
in this reality?
>> Morley: Yeah, so in a
lucid dream time is relative
to this reality.
So in a non-lucid dream
time is out the window.
You know, you can have a dream.
It seems like hours and it has
lasted 20 minutes or something.
In a lucid dream time
is relative to this.
So they've done this
with scientific studies
where they got people to go
into lucid dream state and flick
their eyes, saying begin
and then they estimate
five minutes in time
and flick their eyes again to
say I think it is five minutes.
They've shown it's roughly
the same as this state.
So imagine the conversation that
we've had now in, I don't know,
ten minutes or something.
Imagine what you could do in
ten minutes in your psyche.
Imagine what you could
explore inside your own mind
within even 30 seconds
let alone ten minutes.
And a lucid dream, you
could have lucid dreams
up to 90 minutes in
length which is kind of,
once you're past kind of, eight,
nine hours in bed you're going
to have very, very
long dream periods
and those can be lucid
in the whole period.
>> Lilou: So where
do you start from?
Does it start from
an intention or?
>> Morley: Yeah, intention
definitely the most
important thing.
For the book I was
interviewing some Lamas and one
of the Lamas I interviewed
was -- there's the book!
>> Lilou: Beautiful
book by the way,
my God, the cover is so great.
>> Morley: I know we shouldn't
judge books by their covers
but if you've got a really
badass cover I think it does
help a little.
>> Lilou: Yeah, your
friend did good work.
>> Morley: Yeah, he did.
What were we talking
apart from badass covers?
Oh Lamas, okay.
The badass Lama.
>> Lilou: The intention.
>> Morley: The intention yes,
the Lama Zangmo
who is the female Lama who
runs the Buddhist center
where I live near London Bridge,
I was asking her about the kind
of most important
aspect of Dream Yoga
and I thought she was going to
give me some sort of, you know,
secret Tibetan formula
to the lucid dream state.
And she thought about it
and she said, Charlie,
the most important thing
for Dream Yoga, and I said,
yeah, yeah, what is it?
And she went you've got
to really want to do it.
You have to be fired
up and I was like,
you've got to be fired up?
You know, I won't find that in
the Tibetan text and she said,
no, but this is the truth.
You know, you've got
to really be fired up.
If you really believe that
lucid dreams are your birthright
that you can do it, to remind
yourself that you did it
as a child, that the
children naturally do it.
It's not something that we
need to learn how to do it,
it's something we need
to remember how to do,
that it is in our capacity.
You know the capacity of
the mind is that which knows
so in fact a lucid
dream is not weird.
Non-lucid dreaming,
perhaps, is weird
because lucidity is a natural,
spontaneous arising of the mind.
So to remind yourself of this
be really geered up to do it,
a really strong intention.
That's probably the
most powerful technique.
But then of course
there's all the other stuff
with dream diaries
and reality checks
and falling asleep
consciously and self-hypnosis
and all the techniques.
>> Lilou: Yeah, yeah,
yeah because once you have
that intention, I mean great
but then is it a matter
of also setting one just before
sleeping and saying, hey,
you know, speaking to you,
yourself inside and saying,
hey man, you know, I want
to wake up where I want
to be able to consciously dream.
I mean this is a whole training.
It seems so far out
when we start.
>> Morley: Yeah absolutely.
>> Lilou: Because we feel we're
not in control of our dreams,
like it kind of happens and
there's a period of time
where we dream more than
others but apart from that.
>> Morley: Yeah, most
people don't even remember
their dreams.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> Morley: You know, the
majority of people if you talk
to them they say, you know,
I don't remember my dreams
or I don't dream and sometimes I
get complacent because I teach
within kind of Buddhist
circles and spiritual circles
and I start to just assume
everyone remembers their dreams
and everyone has a dream life.
And then when I do more kind
of public talks and I realize,
you know people don't.
People just don't
remember their dreams.
People tell me they
don't dream and I try
to explain scientifically
everybody dreams four
or five times a night,
blah, blah, blah.
But there's a long way to go.
But the first thing is
recognizing that you dream.
The second thing is
setting your intention
to remember your dreams because
unless you remember your dreams
you're not going to
have lucid dreams
because a lucid dream
is based on.
You know, if we take this
from the dream diary thing,
the more conscious you are of
what you're dreaming about,
the more likely you are
to become conscious
within the dream.
>> Lilou: Yes.
>> Morley: So the first
thing is to become conscious
of what you're dreaming about,
so keeping a dream diary,
setting that intent,
writing down your dreams.
Then you'll start to get
to know the territory.
You know, get to know the
territory of the dream.
Oh, I always dream
about being in a forest.
on the planet Mars.
I always dream about
this or that.
So the next time you're
on the planet Mars
in the dream I think oh,
I always dream about this.
Oh, and you become lucid.
You know, you get to know
the territory so well
that you'll know the
territory when you're in it.
Now I could blindfold you and
take you into a bakery, right,
can't see the bakery but
I bet you could tell me,
oh, I'm in a bakery.
You know the sounds.
You know the smell.
You can hear the conversations.
So too with the dream, we need
to get to know the dream so well
that even if we're
blindfolded, as in non-lucidity,
we'll be able to tell
when we're in the dream
and that revelation is the
blindfold being revealed
and that experience from the
dream as real as this reality.
>> Lilou: Sometimes we remember
more in the morning, no?
And is there a time during the
night or the day, the night
or whenever we're asleep
that we can better remember?
>> Morley: Yeah, on
the retreats I run.
I run these like
four-day retreats
and on the retreats
we'll be sleeping
from about 10:30 till 3:00 in
the morning and then from 3,
then I start waking everyone up
every 90 minutes.
So the first like, the first
three cycles, basically, first
four and a half hours you're on
your bed and then I come
around with a gong and everyone
wishes they'd never met me.
>> Lilou: There's
the alarm clock.
>> Morley: And then if they
like they can then move
into the shrine room and we have
a sacred sleeping area set up.
It's like another bed
but very just thin
blanket and stuff like that.
So you make some divide
between the sleep of rest
which is the first
three or four cycles
where you're getting your delta
wave, your deep sleep
and the next few cycles
which is when you're doing
mainly dreaming.
And in that case I'm waking
everyone in 90 minutes
so you're writing down
your dreams at 3 o'clock,
then again at 4:30, then
again at 6, you know.
So there are periods all through
the night you can remember
your dreams.
Most people however find in
the early morning it's easier
to remember their dreams,
partly because they've
had six hours sleep.
You know, if I try
and remember my dreams
after three hours sleep,
I've only three hours sleep.
I'm super tired.
My brain is not refreshed
but after six hours
my brain is refreshed.
I can remember.
I'm very clear.
I have clarity.
But yeah, dreams can be
recalled at any time.
>> Lilou: Can you feel when
you're doing something like that
at the beginning, that
you're kind of changing
or you feel a little
bit disrupted by it
because you're not
changing the reality
but you're wondering how
it's going to influence
or even just kind of just,
am I making all this up?
Is that really going
to influence my life?
>> Morley: Not really, most
people find they sleep better
when they start to lucid
dream, especially insomniacs.
You know insomniacs
love lucid dreaming
because they've been told
that there's something wrong
with multiple wakeups
in the night.
They come to one of my retreats
and I'm saying you're going
to wake up four times a night.
And they say, oh, I wake up
four times a night anyway.
And I'm like great,
you're there already.
You know because if you give
insomniacs something else
to do rather than lying in bed
and pathologizing the condition
of nighttime wakefulness
they can say, okay,
well I'm awake in the night.
Now there's a certain meditation
I can do to help me enter back
into the dream and have
a lucid dream state.
They love it.
And of course once they relax
they start just sleeping
better anyway.
So a lot of people find it
completely recalibrates their
view of sleep.
You look at that third
of your life as 30 years
that you spend asleep not
as wasted time but as time
for exploration and
time for fun.
You end up getting to the point
where you're excited
to go to sleep.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> Morley: You're, oh,
when can I go to bed?
When can I go to bed because
I want to do the lucid dream?
I want to remember my dreams.
I want to write down this.
I want to do this.
You know, it makes the
whole process exciting.
And why shouldn't
it be exciting?
You know, why should we
habitually give up 30 years
of our life to non-awareness?
You know we have this saying.
>> Lilou: You sleep 30 years?
>> Morley: Yeah,
that's like my life plus
like four months of something.
It's ridiculous.
Somebody said my lifespan plus
a few months would be given
up to non-awareness, to blackout
I'd ask for my money back.
I'd say, you know, no.
I've only like 100 years
max to do my thing.
I miss 30 years on spending.
>> Lilou: My thing! I love it!
>> Morley: So suddenly
this allows you
to do your thing
in those 30 years.
Now of course sometimes we need
to blackout, you
know, deep sleep.
We need to be blacked out.
But not all of sleep, we've got
at least a few hours every night
where the brain is reactivated.
You're not resting
in dreaming sleep.
So if you're not resting anyway
you might as well do something
with that non-rest
state, to lucid dreams
to explore the psyche, to
integrate the personality,
to do your spiritual
practice in your sleep.
>> Lilou: So when you
dream and you're aware
of the dreaming that's when
you kind of wake up within
that dream and then you can
kind shift the scenario wherever
you want?
So how, how do you go and then
end up having sex or going
into compassion when it
started with a demon?
>> Morley: Well --
work with the demon.
You know if you've got a
dream plan that, well as soon
as you get lucid I want
to go surfing, let's say
but then you become
lucid, you're in a forest.
I'd say don't change
the forest into a beach,
just drop the surfing, go
with the flow of the dream.
You know, this is why I
don't teach dream control.
I teach dream choreography.
This is about directing the
dream, influencing the dream,
making friends with the dream.
And the same way the
choreographer may be presented
with the dancers and the
music but then they say,
oh you're a choreographer, so
you write the dance routine?
So too with the lucid dream
so I say don't change
the music of the dream.
Don't change the dancers.
Work with what you've got
but make it your own dance
and that's what lucid
dreaming is.
It's like dancing
with the unconscious.
It's not about controlling
the dream,
it's about making friends.
If you really want
control in the dreams
or you can make things
appear and disappear at will,
far better to make friends with
the unconscious than to try
and boss it about because it's
so much more powerful
than us anyway.
You know people who think
they can control their dreams
are ascribing their sense
of I, their, me, my,
I consciousness an inflated
degree of importance.
You know, that me, my, I,
that little top ten percent
of the iceberg as it were,
is paled in significance
to the awesome power
of the unconscious.
You know it would be an
arrogant sailor who thinks
that they control the sea
and so too it's an
arrogant lucid dreamer
who thinks they control
the dream.
It's not about dream control.
It's about friendship
with the unconscious.
>> Lilou: So how do you direct?
Is there any way to direct it
though in a certain direction
or have a certain
type of experience?
Let's say you're a tennis
player or you are passionate
about meditation and
compassion to the world.
How do you go there?
You find that you
automatically go there anyway?
>> Morley: Let's say this
tennis playing thing.
Let's say I want to
use my lucid dream
to practise my tennis
serve or something.
>> Lilou: Or yoga?
>> Morley: Now once I've set
that intention very
often you'll become lucid
in a tennis environment because
the unconscious is listening,
saying okay, you
want the tennis,
well I'll get it ready for you.
You know, it's kind of making
the scene while it waits
for you.
But other times let's say
you become lucid in a forest.
You want to practise your
tennis serve and you don't want
to do it what I do which
is say, go with the flow,
then in that case you might want
to call out, tennis court now.
You know, words manifest
very promptly
in the lucid dream state
and this is so much fun.
So you enter the lucid dream,
people say how do I
make things happen?
I say, ask for it to happen.
You're in your own mind so
simply make a suggestion.
Now of course you don't
have to call it out loud,
just an intention in the lucid
dream creates a manifestation.
But to say it out loud it
does something very powerful
because there's kind of
this voice energy there too.
But you can direct it.
You can choose what to do.
But it's really about
getting to know the dream.
Like when I first started lucid
dreaming all I was worried
about was staying in
the dream, you know,
and then eventually you
want to stabilize and go,
okay sexy girls now and
you kind of get a sexy girl
to appear and stuff like that.
The first few lucid dreams
you're just trying to stay
in there because it can be
very unstable, the first ones.
But once you've been in
there for, you know hundreds
and hundreds of times
you can get in there
and you can just start
to make things manifest,
just with your mind.
So you can go fwoom and
you can just create a kind
of a tennis court and you
can create the other player.
It's like a virtual
reality simulator.
>> Lilou: Self inception, ah?
I saw that word on your website.
>> Morley: Yeah, so
self-inception is
about using the lucid dream
state in a similar way
that you'd use a
hypnotherapy session.
So it's going into the lucid
dream and calling out statements
of healing intent,
planting that seed.
So you know, you go in the lucid
dream state and like the smoker,
Antonio did, went in the
lucid dream and he called out,
you know, I am free of the
addiction of cigarettes,
the addiction to nicotine
no longer serves me.
I am a non-smoker
now and forever.
Call out these statements
of healing intent
in the lucid dream and wakes
up and the addiction is gone.
It sounds too good
to be true but again,
it's not because it's
quite difficult to get
to that lucid dream
state in the first place.
It does take training.
>> Lilou: So, self-inception
would be the planting those
seeds but basically that's
what happens during lucid
dreaming anyway.
You kind of plant the seed or
an intention right in there?
>> Morley: Well, not necessarily
if I was just like lucid
and like flying about the place
what intention am I setting?
I'm just flying about.
I'm exploring.
>> Lilou: Having fun, yeah.
>> Morley: Yeah, having
fun but once you go
in the lucid dream actually
call out to the space.
So you don't talk
to the characters
if you're incepting an idea, you
actually call out to the space
which is of course the
unconscious and you call it
out with that deep conviction
you are planting a seed
in that super fertile ground
of the unconscious and that
that seed will sprout
into a manifestation
in the waking state.
>> Lilou: Have you had time
because I know you're a Hay
House author so there's Anita
Morjani and so many people
that had near-death experience.
So you find similar
states sometimes?
Can you get to those really
high vibrational places
that people have
experience in NDEs?
>> Morley: Yeah,
well I mean it was a,
it was actually a near
death experience that kind
of brought me into --
brought me out of the sex
and skateboarding phase
of lucid dreaming.
>> Lilou: I love when say that.
>> Morley: Literally all I
spent, for the first like year
or so, lucid dreaming
was sex and skateboarding
but I was 16, I apologize.
I was young and stupid,
now I'm just stupid.
So I had this big kind of
trauma basically when I was 17
and I had these post-traumatic
stress nightmares
like four months after it and
they'd recur every single week.
I'd have the same
nightmare to the point
where I was kind of waking.
I was trying to stay
awake all night
so I wouldn't have
the nightmares
but of course it would
just come the next night.
So this was the time when I
would get into lucid dreaming
as well and I'd read
in the book somewhere
that you could use lucid
dreams to cure nightmares
and I thought, well look
I've had four months of this
and it's really getting me
down and I feel like my kind
of sanity is being kind
of questioned here.
So I managed to become lucid
in the recurring nightmare.
I turned to face the
source of my fear.
It dissolved and the
nightmare went overnight.
And it was then that I realized,
okay, this is powerful stuff.
This is just the kind
of messing about.
This is a very direct,
psychological intervention
that we have access
to every single night.
And yeah, that was
when I realized
that I was holding a baby.
I was holding potential and if
I nurtured this thing it could
grow to be this incredibly
powerful aspect of my life.
So, yeah for me, near death
experience was linked to my,
sort of the kind of
genesis of my practice.
>> Lilou: And Buddhism, since
in Buddhism the, do they believe
in reincarnation, right?
So is there a link with this
Dream Yoga, as they call it
and what you call lucid
dreaming and the reincarnation
and how you can make, even
recall or go into past lives?
>> Morley: Yeah, so the main,
the core benefit in fact
of lucid dreaming within
Tibetan Buddhism is preparation
for the death and dying state.
So you know straight off the
bat this isn't about working
with kind of self-hypnotic
ideas.
This isn't about exploration.
This definitely isn't about
sex and skateboarding.
This is about going
and then preparing
for the big sleep
at the end of life.
Because it is said that once you
die you don't just get reborn.
You aren't reincarnated
straight away.
You enter the bardo state.
Bardo is a Sanskrit word
that means place in between.
In fact this life is a bardo,
its existence is a
succession of bardos.
But in this case the after-death
bardo is said to be a dreamlike,
hallucinatory experience
that we enter
into once the mind
stream has separated
from the gross corporeal
body at the point of death.
So basically you die, your mind
stream separates from this thing
because this is dying and
enters into a bardo state
which is a little
bit like a dream.
It's not a dream but it's
a little bit like it.
So it's said that if you can
train yourself to become lucid
in the dream you're
training yourself
to become lucid in the bardo.
So rather than go aha
I'm dreaming, you might
go aha I'm dead.
Now why the hell would you
want to say, aha I'm dead?
It sounds like a
nightmare right?
But, apparently if you had that
realization of aha I'm dead,
full realization in the bardo
this contains the potential
for full spiritual
enlightenment, you know,
top deck stuff and highest,
highest potential is
if you could become
lucid in the bardo.
And every time you
train in lucid dreaming,
whether you know it or not,
you are training
your mind's capacity
to recognize the bardo state.
And that's a great
practice to do,
that means every time we do
this practice we're training
for that moment of death
and every lucid dream we have
brings the fear of death,
actually not further
actually, closer towards us
but in a fearless way.
We go towards that
fear and we say,
yeah death is coming
and I'm ready for it.
But you know, I could die
tomorrow so let's make sure
that tonight I practice for my
death so that I'm ready for it,
so that we can die with
a little bit less fear,
a little bit more mindfulness,
a little bit more awareness
to allow us to enter into that
state as we do in our dreams
with compassion and
with lucidity.
>> Lilou: What is the purpose
of Buddhism or how do Buddhists,
I know there's all kind of
different types of Buddhism
so I don't know which
one exactly you practice
but what's the aim of it
all, really of life even?
>> Morley: Well, I
practice Tibetan Buddhism
and I teach lucid dreaming
with the Karma Kagyu lineage
of Tibetan Buddhism
and the Buddhist Center
where I live is a Karma
Kagyu Buddhist Center.
But probably the
easiest way to answer
that question is a quote
from Buddha himself.
When Buddha was asked,
you know, what's that?
What's your teaching?
And he said, commit not one
unwholesome action,
cultivate a wealth of
virtue and train the mind.
This is the teachings of Buddha.
So he's saying, don't do
anything that hurts yourself
or others, be kind to
people and train your mind.
And then apparently in a
kind of parable the guy said,
oh even that's too many words.
You know, sum it up, you know,
make it even more succinct.
And Buddha said,
train your mind.
You know Buddhism is a
series of practices engaging
in mind training, to train
the mind to be stronger
and more flexible and more
liable to recognize illusion
because the recognition of
illusion, the illusion of self
and other, the illusion of
separateness is the foundation
of the mistake, you know,
of believing that I'm better
than you, you know, this
egocentric awareness
that we step into is based on
a fundamental misunderstanding
that you're different from
me and in fact, you're not.
You're an expiration of
oneness is a natural arising
or a natural endpoint
of mind training.
When we train the mind to a
point where it's so flexible
and so strong and so
compassionate that we see other
as self and even get
to a point where we see
that self is illusion too.
But mind training, being kind
and not being mean to people.
If I was talking to a kid I'd
say, like that's what the,
train your mind like it's
a, like you train your body.
You want to have a strong mind.
And you'll be kind to
people and don't be mean.
>> Lilou: Yeah, so you can go
with all those three I
guess in lucid dreaming.
I mean you have to like this
probably, this training.
This is really ying stuff!
>> Morley: Yeah, I
mean lucid dreaming is
about training the
mind most definitely.
It's also about, you know,
I talk about these three
foundations of lucid dreaming,
acceptance, friendliness
and kindness
which are actually three pillars
of kind of the spiritual path.
Often the way I look at it, you
know we have to have acceptance
that almost everything
in the lucid dream is us.
Ninety-nine percent of it
is a projection of our mind.
It's not some external demon.
It's not somebody like, you
know, hacking your mind,
all these kind of
dualistic notions we have.
It's us, however scary it seems.
You know and we go in the
lucid dream state we're going
to see ourselves warts and all.
We're going to see all
the stuff we've repressed
in the waking state we will
see in the lucid dream.
And for some people they
can't accept that so they set
up a dualism, oh a
demon came into my dream
or aliens abducted me in my
dreams and this kind of stuff
and you think, maybe but
maybe not, so acceptance
and then friendliness,
friendliness
to everything in the dream.
To know that if everything
is me then let me be friendly
towards everything.
Let me not reject the dream.
Let me not judge the dream as I
wouldn't reject or judge myself
or want to be rejected
or judged by another.
So we enter into the dream with
friendliness and with kindness.
You know once we know that
everything in the dream is us
so in some way at
least connected
to our psychology why would
we be unkind to anything?
You know, why would
anyone commit a violence
in their lucid dream?
It would be like shooting
yourself in the foot
or punching yourself in
the face, no it's you.
So be kind to everything
in the lucid dream,
be friendly to the dream and
accept that it's part of you.
Now of course we can apply those
three pillars to this state.
Imagine how much easier life
would be if we could accept
that the other was
just as important as us,
that we could be kind to the
other and we could be friendly.
You know, you can get to the
point where you want to be kind
and friendly to chairs.
You know there's a bit
in the book where I talk
about in this lucid dream
I start hugging a chair
because I realize that
God, if everything
in the lucid dream is me then
so too the inanimate
objects are me.
So I start like hugging
a chair and thought, God,
what if my Lama could see me now
and think Charlie's
gone mad or something.
But it was a realization,
the chair was as worthy
of compassion as the
other dream characters,
that that chair was
just as important as me
because it was created by that
same mind, that same genesis
that created the people in the
dream also created the chairs,
and so too in this state.
>> Lilou: How do you manifest
things, like if you want,
if you really want something
to happen in your life or?
Because you've achieved
quite a lot for now,
between the Tedx and
the book and the conferences,
and the this and the that.
Can you actually
call some things
and bring some things
in your reality too?
How do you, how does
lucid dreaming help you
to manifest this?
>> Morley: So at a very basic
level you can literally engage
the visualization or
manifestation in the dream.
So let's say I'm an
architect and I want
to see what my new
building will look like.
In the lucid dream
state you can call
up a three-dimensional version
of your blueprint that you
can then walk around.
So the lucid dream is a
very basic state can be used
to manifest reality to
see how it will pan out.
So you've got to practise like
a rehearsal ground for reality.
Let's say you're scared
of public speaking.
With the lucid dream state you
can go into the lucid dream
and practice your
public speaking
and maybe everyone will politely
clap or maybe they'll boo
and boo you and chuck
you off the stage but
you know it's just mind, it's a
perfect place to rehearse.
So in that way again we can
manifest what we want to see
in the waking state,
confidence in public speaking,
by rehearsing in
the dream state.
But at the other end
of the spectrum it
becomes more mystical.
It seems in the lucid dream
state we can plant very strong
seeds of intention that
manifest far more powerfully
in the waking state
than if we were
to set those intentions now.
You know, right now this
is quite a gross state.
You know, this feels
pretty real.
You feel pretty separate.
You know I feel like me and
you feel like me in this state.
You do feel like me
because when I was talking
about this, do you
feel like you?
I feel like me, blah,
blah, blah.
The lucid dream state,
it's much more flowing.
You know in the lucid
dream state
at least we know it
is projection whereas
in this state we kind
of think it's all real.
So because the lucid dream state
is in many ways a state closer
to an actual experience
of reality it becomes
like an echo chamber,
like one prayer said
in the lucid dream seems
to be worth a thousand
in the waking state
because you're going kind
of direct from the source.
You're going from pure
consciousness like direct
to the kind of source
consciousness.
And in Tibetan Buddhism
it's said that one moment
of spiritual practice
in the lucid dream state
is worth a one-week retreat
in the waking state.
So if we apply those
same kinds of criteria
to manifestation we can see
just how powerful it is.
You know, if you go
into the lucid dream
and call out, I am loved.
I am lovable.
I attract love into my life.
That's not just like
me saying it now.
That's like an echo chamber.
You know, that's like saying it
a 1,000 times, once you do it in
the lucid dream state, so it's a
very, very powerful place
for amplification of intent.
>> Lilou: I had another
question regarding and zip,
it went away.
What was it?
Oh my God, I was so
excited about that question.
It just went out.
What was it?
What are some other
aspects of lucid dreaming
that we haven't talked
about yet?
And it's going to
come right back up.
>> Morley: We can talk about
the spiritual practice thing.
So, the lucid dream state is
a very powerful place to do
your spiritual practice.
Let's say I'm doing kind
of a chakra meditation right
now in the waking state.
Now although the kind of new-age
scene like to tell us, oh,
chakras are in perfect
working order it isn't quite
that simple.
Now often our chakras are often
literally spinning the wrong way
or they're kind of just
termed rusty chakras.
You know, our energy systems are
quite dis-aligned unless we're
doing a lot of spiritual
practice so let's say I was
in a chakra practice in
this state things may not be
in perfect alignment.
If I do a chakra meditation
in the lucid dream state, the
chakras are in perfect alignment
because I have no physical form.
In the dream state
I'm in my dream body.
I'm in my subtle energetic form
so we reach our full potential.
You know in the lucid dream
state your chakras are perfect
so if you do chakra meditation
in the lucid dream you can
reach far greater levels
of realization and
attainment than you could
in the waking state because this
gross corporeal body stops us
doing stuff, like for one,
like you're trying
to sit in full lotus.
A lot of people unless
they're trained in yoga,
their knees will
start to hurt, right?
Lucid dream state there are no
knees so your knees won't hurt
so you can sit in
perfect posture for one,
your chakras aligned, your
energy systems are balanced
and for some people they
find, you know,
meditation in the lucid
dream state is one
of the most mind blowing
experiences they can have.
You know, in the book
I talk about this.
When I first started I could
barely sustain meditation
in the lucid dream for more
than a few seconds and I felt
like my head had been put in
a microwave, and you just woke
up with just this huge shot
of absolute bliss that led you
to wake up, so meditation
in the lucid dream state is
very, very powerful.
In fact one of the Buddhist
scholars, B. Alan Wallace used
to translate for the
Dalai Lama has said
that of the three main
states of awareness or states
of experience, sleep,
dream and waking,
the one with the least potential
for spiritual realization is
in fact the waking state.
It is easier to reach your full
potential in the sleep and dream
than the waking state
because you're closer
to enlightened nature
in the lucid dream
than you are in this
waking state.
>> Lilou: And then you
can chat with Buddha?
>> Morley: Yeah, exactly.
>> Lilou: Are you, do you
do those conversations?
>> Morley: Well, let's
say I'm in a lucid dream
and I meet Buddha right?
I've got two options
working here.
One is you're meeting
a representation
of your own higher self.
So for me, my kind of inner
archetype of higher self,
the wise man for me, would
probably look like my guru,
Lama Yeshe Rinpoche because
he's my guru archetype.
If you were really
into Christianity let's say it
might look like the Virgin Mary
for you or Jesus Christ himself.
So we could be working just
with internal archetypes.
That's still a big deal, you
know, to meet your higher self.
In whatever form, it's still a
very, very powerful experience.
And then there's the
other option which is
that the lucid dream state
is partially permeable,
very difficult for anything to
get in without you letting it
but it is possible
for your consciousness
to expand beyond the boundaries
of the lucid dream state
and enterwhat we might call
the collective unconscious,
the universal mind-steam.
It could even be about kind
of astral plains and that sort
of stuff although I don't
usually use that terminology.
So it could be in
the lucid dream.
There is the option to
engage aspects outside of you
and then you could be
looking at very powerful,
universal archetypes of
compassion such as Buddha mind.
Who's to tell the
difference, only the dreamer?
You know, you're the only one
in there, hello and people ask,
what do you think this
was in a lucid dream?
And I say, well I wasn't
there so I don't know
but I can give you hints on
what it might be but it's
for the dreamer to decide.
You know, we.
>> Lilou: How did it felt too?
I guess it's an important
question.
>> Morley: Yeah, like I've had
enough dreams of my teacher
to know when it's just
a projection of him
and when it might actually be a
connection with him, you know,
as an actual energetic being.
>> Lilou: Yeha, because often
we hear some teacher,
some spiritual teachers
here that say, oh, I'll come
and visit you during the sleep
or you'll receive
emails, you know.
I receive sometimes
emails of people saying,
you were in my dream last night.
How does that work?
>> Morley: Yes, I mean let's
say I have a lucid dream tonight
and you have a lucid
dream tonight
and we dream of each other.
Then I next send.
>> Lilou: My God, come on!
>> Morley: You know,
but what does it mean?
It just means you had a lucid
dream and I had a lucid dream.
It doesn't mean anything.
It just means the projection.
However, if we were to do
that intentionally and I was
to give you a password and you
could prove that password to me
in the waking state
then we could know
that there was a connection.
So there are a lot of
password experiments going
on at the moment actually
on wakeupinyourdreams.com, a
website run by a friend of mine.
He's just started a
password experiment.
But it seems like
it is possible.
You know, the people
who seem to be able
to enter your lucid dream
if you have the intention
to let them are kind
of dead relatives.
This one seems to come
up again and again.
It's strange because I don't
have any science for this.
Usually I try and make
sure everything is backed
up by science, no
science for this.
It would be only anecdote.
It seems if you have a very
strong heart connection
or blood connection to somebody,
then when they're dead it seems
like the lucid dream state
can be a kind of a portal
for communication with them.
And the other people
who seem to be able
to enter the lucid
dream state are those
who have woken up in this state.
You know if you've reached full
lucidity in this state it seems
to give you the ability to
enter other people's dreams,
so fully awakened
masters seem to be able
to enter their students' dreams.
>> Lilou: Yeah, I'm wondering
if after a certain time
and that was my question earlier
that I forgot but how does it?
I guess it's a better
moment to ask it now
but how does it influence
you on a day to day life?
Can you actually
live in parallel,
kind of in a dream state
or imagine something else?
Like it probably gives you the
capacity to expand your vision
of this reality while
you're doing it
so I'm not saying lucid dreaming
while you're actually talking
to me right now but you
could kind of thing,
to improve the experience?
>> Morley: Yeah, lucid dreaming
definitely broadens your
perspective of reality.
It doesn't make you
floaty and dreamy.
You know, a lot of people when
they meet me, I see this kind
of look of disappointment
when they thought the lucid
dreaming teacher was going
to be all like, wow,
crazy, hippie.
Where's reality?
Where's the dream, you
know, the opposite,
every time you have a lucid
dream you're training yourself
to tell the difference,
to know the difference
between waking reality,
dream reality, illusion
and the other aspect
of illusion.
So actually lucid dreamers
are often very grounded
and they're often
very pro-active.
Like if you spent your
nighttime hugging your demons,
walking through walls, flying
through the sky, the next day
at work when your boss
is giving you hell,
it's like water off a
duck's back, you know.
It's much easier to
work through this
because you feel so empowered.
You feel so limitless in the
lucid dream and you can't forget
that so you bring that sense of
limitlessness into this state
and realize that, yeah, although
I can't walk through that wall
in this state maybe I can
walk through the brick wall
of somebody's projections, or
even more importantly the brick
wall of my own projections
of my own baggage.
That it's not so solid that I
can pass through it and that
when I'm confronted by the
demons of my own arrogance
or my own fear so too
can I hug them just
like I did in the lucid dream.
>> Lilou: I wanted to finish
by this wonderful, you know,
cover because, and I
know this is your friend
that did this cover and
obviously this was meaningful
to you to have a cool cover.
Tell us about the significance
of the different elements there
so that we can maybe, you know,
end up on this to expand the.
>> Morley: Yeah.
>> Lilou: So to fully get it,
that maybe some aspects
are missing.
>> Morley: So the cover was
designed by my friend, Fyb1,
who is an ex-graffiti artist
who's now gone straight
so don't worry, he's not an
illegal graffiti artist anymore.
But he's got the kind
of street-art vibe
and I actually sent him
a sketch of what I wanted
and I kept the sketch
and it's so bad.
It's like this little stick
man Buddha with a brain,
all this kind of stuff but I
knew that I wanted every aspect
of the book to be represented.
So I got the brain to represent
all the neuroscience you find
in the book.
You've got this hand because
hands do strange things
in lucid dreams, reality checks.
You've got the dragonfly
which is the Toltec symbol
of the gateway keeper
to the dream.
You've got the butterfly,
of course the famous
Taoist parable,
am I the man dreaming
a butterfly,
a butterfly dreaming a man.
You've got the lotus flower,
the symbol of no mud, no lotus,
the fact that we need the muddy
water for the beautiful lotus
to arise, just as in our dreams.
And of course the A symbol
which is a Tibetan syllable
which you often visualize in
the throat as you fall asleep
to lead to lucid dreams and
it kind of looks pretty too.
>> Lilou: I was,
what's the hand stuff?
What do you mean?
>> Morley: So in the lucid
dream hands do strange things.
So one of the ways, if you
think you're in a lucid dream
but you can't tell for
sure you look at your hand
and you look away again.
You look back or you look at
your, flip it over a couple
of times and very often your
hand will blur or glitch
or you'll get like an
extra finger coming out
or something like that.
It's to do with a kind
of a brain process
that finds it difficult to
replicate detail patterns.
So this is the easiest
detail pattern to look
at that's attached to your body.
So you look at the detailed
pattern, flip it over,
flip it back and often the
brain because it's not working
to full capacity will
create an imperfect pattern
and then you can
tell you're dreaming.
>> Lilou: So it's kind
of like in "Inception",
you might have really liked
that movie, didn't you?
>> Morley: Yeah,
yeah so when it came
out I did a series
of talks on it.
Of course in "Inception" he has
so many lucid dreams he wakes
up in the morning, thinks
am I dreaming or not?
So he spins his little
spinning top and he thinks well
if it falls over that means I'm
awake because there's gravity
and if it keeps on spinning
then that means that I'm still
in the lucid dream state.
So this is like our totem, we
want to tell if we're dreaming
or not, we look at our hand
and if the hand stays stable
then there's a good chance
that we are in fact awake.
Of course the cool thing about
"Inception", spoiler alert,
is that the spinning
top is not his totem.
And I won't say what it is
but watch the movie again.
>> Lilou: Oh my God.
>> Morley: So that's
a red herring.
That's not his totem.
His totem is something else.
>> Lilou: Thank you
for that, okay.
Well, we're going
to check that out.
We're going to do our
little check/quest.
Anything else
that you would like to say
or to finish this
interview with?
>> Morley: No, just that if
people are more interested
in learning this stuff
then the book's out now
and it's got all
the things you need.
It's got a full toolbox of
techniques that teach you
to lucid dream and
there's on my website,
charliemorley.com is all
the list of workshops
and retreats that I'm
doing next year too.
>> Lilou: It's about
practising that?
>> Moreley: Yeah,
it's about doing it.
I mean the book and the stuff
you can read on the website,
the stuff is good but it's
about bringing it into practice
and actually doing the sleepover
workshops and really kind
of making it part of your life.
>>Lilou: Awesome, thank you so
much for this delicious
interview.
>> Morley: Thank you,
it's been delicious.
>> Lilou: Big, big kisses,
like you [inaudible].
Well, hope you have enjoyed this
conversation and if you want
to put comments underneath and,
you know, there's a whole forum
that you could go on and we'll
be really happy to read those
and to share those further.
Thank you so much, big, big
kisses from London, bye-bye.
[ Music ]